# Advection-diffusion simulation 

## About the simulation

This project simulates the advection and diffusion of odor molecules in a 2D space using a forward-Euler, agent-based model. Odor molecules are simulated as points with a 2D space and stepped forward using the Crank-Nicholson method. Advection is based on fluid velocity vector fields provided by the user. Diffusion is simulated by a random walk the distance of the step being the root-mean squared distance of diffusion (based on the diffusion coefficient, D) in a pseudo-random direction based on a unit circle and an angle selected by R's `runif()` function.

#### About Diffusion

Diffusion is the random walk that molecules (and other very small particles) undergo at temperatures above absolute zero due to Brownian motion. Brownian motion is the random wiggling of atoms and small molecules due to temperature. Fluid molecules at a small enough scale will jostle back and forth and tend to lead to displacement over long time periods. 

Average displacement of particles from their original positions after some time $t$ can be described using root-mean squared displacement $d_{rms}$ due to diffusion: $d = \sqrt(4Dt)$ where $D$ is the diffusion coefficient (units: m^2^ s^-1^) which is typically an empirical measurement. 

Over time, $d_{rms}$ increases based on the value of $D$. Higher diffusion coefficients lead to higher average displacements. 

In this code, diffusion is modeled using $d_{rms}$ in `diffuse.R`. In this code, a random number is generated by `runif()` for each simulated molecule, and a direction is picked based on that random number. 

#### About Advection

Advection is the movement of particles due only to the motion of the surrounding fluid. It is not typically something that can be divorced from diffusion in real-life fluid motions, but it is a separate physical process. 



## Code Inputs

Requires the following inputs: 

 - User set diffusion coefficient, `D`, on line 11 of `simulate_advdiff.R`
 - User set time step, `delta.t`, on line 12 of `simulate_advdiff.R`.
 - User set end time, `end.time`, on line 13 of `simulate_advdiff.R`.
 - User set starting position of all odor molecules (lines 14 and 15 of `simulate_advdiff.R`).
 - Fluid velocity vector fields (`x`, `y` positions, and `u`, `v` components of velocity) in the `data/` folder.

## Code Outputs

It will return a plot of the starting and ending positions of each odor molecule and write a csv file of these positions in results/.

## To run the simulation

 1. Open the R Project. 
 2. Create a `results/` folder in the top directory. 
 3. Make changes to the inputs as desired. 
 4. Run: `source("src/simulate_advdiff.R", chdir = TRUE)`
 
